I know that so many of you, both
personally and and someone you love has
been impacted by cancer or will be
impacted by cancer. And if you're a
healthcare practitioner who's looking
for more effective tools for your
patients, this show is going to be a
much watch must watch episode. So,
without further ado, let's let's bring
in Dr. Seyfried.
Hey, Doc. How are you? I'm doing very
well. Thank you, John. It's nice to be
here.
Oh, I'm so happy to have you, so honored
to have you on our show.
Uh and like said, we were
introduced by email by Martin Gillespie,
a cancer survivor himself, who I also
had on my show a few episodes ago.
So, I was very grateful for that. Um
and and so, yeah, I just I just wanted
to find out how did you actually get
started down this pathway studying
cancer as a metabolic disease?
Well, as I as I uh
I started in in this whole thing cuz I
have a degree in genetics and
biochemistry from the University of
Illinois, master's degree in genetics
from Illinois State University, and I
did a lot of work in
in bio- biochemistry
related to epilepsy at Yale University,
where where I was a postdoc and then a
faculty member.
Um so, so we were we were always putzing
around with different things.
Um but the
my my my
linkage to to cancer was through
basically glycolipid biochemistry
having no relationship to any kind of
metabolic therapy or any kind of way to
manage it. It was predominantly
what we what what we call discovery
research. We just analyzed the patterns
of glycolipids in tumors
compared to normal tissue
and try to figure out what's going on.
Um so, it's a comparative analysis. And
and of course, we were interested in the
structure and function of gly- various
glycolipids,
which are lipids with carbohydrate.
They're involved in adhesion and and
movement and that kind of thing. But but
it was just like, "Wow, look at all the
abnormalities that cancer cells have
in glycolipid biology."
Um and then people thought, "Well, maybe
these glycolipids play a role in
angiogenesis, which is the abnormal
vascularization of tumors." And we did
come up with some key
lipids that did reduce angiogenesis. It
was quite interesting. But but but the
issue, of course, is we were working on
on managing epileptic seizures in mice
independently of our research on
glycolipid biochemistry. So, so um but
we noticed that
uh we some of my colle- my my students
were looking more into
ketogenic therapies for epilepsy, which
is which is where it all started. Right.
With Wilder in 1921 at the Mayo Clinic.
So, so um
and they asked me what I thought about.
I said, "Well, at Yale, they didn't get
excited about ketogenic. They didn't
want any part of it. They thought drugs
would be the best when I was there."
But my students kind of dragged me into
the idea because Jim Abrams
uh who started the Charlie Foundation,
unfortunately, Jim passed away not that
long ago.
Uh his son Charlie
uh was on a death spiral with epileptic
intractable epileptic seizures,
and uh he he said
um he was just given more and more drugs
until he teamed up with John uh Freeman
and and and and Millie at Johns Hopkins
University, where they where they had
the only satellite work of ketogenic
diets for epilepsy. The predominant one
was there, the late John Freeman.
And um and and Jim Abrams said, "How
come how come He had Charlie, his son go
to the to Johns Hopkins and and get his
seizures managed." And he said, "How
come nobody knows about this?" So, he
got his friend Meryl Streep, the movie
actress, to do a
got do a movie called First Do No Harm
uh to bring bring attention to ketogenic
metabolic therapy for epilepsy. Yep. And
then we had all these epileptic mice
that we were trying to manage, and then
we started to put them on
on calorie restrictions and and
ketogenic diets. But at the same time,
we would have all these brain tumors
that go in and and looking at bio- lipid
biochemistry in the brain tumors.
And if you have two parallel projects,
eventually they overlap. So, so
what happened, we started to we realized
that
calorie restriction was powerfully
anti-angiogenic independent of the
glycolipid patterns of the of the cells.
So, not only was it anti- it shrunk the
tumors down tremendously
uh just by by by cutting calories down
uh making blood sugar low and and
ketones elevated, these tumors were
getting hammered. Um and the blood
vessels were was more powerful
uh anti-angiogenic therapy than any of
the multi-billion dollar drugs that they
were throwing out that eventually turned
out not to work. Um because in the
beginning 2000s, angiogenesis was a hot
topic in in cancer biology. Okay. It
means the abnormal vascularization of
the tumor. Right. The late Judah Folkman
came up and said, "If you target the
abnormal vessels, you can shrink these
tumors."
And we were seeing calorie restriction,
water only fasting, and this kind of
thing blow really reducing these blood
vessels and shrinking the tumors.
Um but then we realized it wasn't just
that. It was the fact that there was a
strong connection between
the level of blood sugar and how slow
and how slow and how how slow or fast
the tumor would grow. So, if the if the
mice had were eating a lot of food uh
with high carbohydrates, they had a high
blood sugar level. Right. The tumors
skyrocketed. I mean, the the tumors were
like turbocharged. And then when you
lowered the blood sugar, the abnormal
vessels went away, the tumor cells
started to die, and the tumor cells
shrunk.
And we're saying, "Wow, this is really
powerful stuff." Uh but people had known
that, but no one
People knew calorie restriction could
both manage and prevent cancer in mice
and and even in humans. But but um I I
didn't realize it, but it was the it was
the work of Otto Warburg, who who
actually received the Nobel Prize for
his work. He discovered the respiratory
enzyme cytochrome c. He did not get a a
Nobel Prize for his work on cancer,
although he was nominated several times.
Um but he found the
the enzyme in the mitochondria that that
allows cells to gain energy from oxygen.
So, so that was a big breakthrough. But
he had studied so many cancer cells, and
he said, "They're all
they're all dependent on high levels of
glucose because they they can't use
oxygen efficiently, they can't respire."
And and and and this was his his biggest
finding. Uh well, we found what he
found, and we corroborated what he
found. But we extended it far beyond
what he what he knew at that time. Um
there was a lot of quest- Some of the
some of the discoveries
were were not available to him at that
time. Uh Otto Warburg. And he absolutely
he abs- he discovered the origin of
cancer. No question about it. He
absolutely is the discoverer of how
cancer starts. Um
he he just wasn't able to roll that into
an effective therapeutic strategy. Uh he
he did not know that the tumor cells not
only
ferment glucose, which is using glucose
to get energy without oxygen,
but he also but he did not know that the
amino acid glutamine is also a
fermentable fuel, which we just recently
published the the strongest evidence
available in the scientific literature.
If you want to learn how to implement
the ketogenic diet and the press-pulse
protocol into your cancer management,
just visit school.com/ketoforcancer,
the new community by our research
analyst Johnny Rocker Meyer.
Within this new community platform, you
can connect with other patients and
learn from their experiences.
You can also just search through the
posts other members have already made.
You will have access to our classroom
section as well, which provides
practical advice and tools for the best
results.
These sections cover all parts of the
press-pulse protocol that you should
implement.
Starting with the general scientific
concepts by Dr. Thomas Seyfried, we will
show you how to start the ketogenic
diet, including which foods to choose
and which to avoid.
Additionally, we prepared a list of
doctors specialized in metabolic
therapy, as well as details about
glutamine inhibition and hyperbaric
oxygen protocols.
So, take a look around at
school.com/ketoforcancer.
That the the the second fuel is
glutamine fermentable. Everybody thought
and still do that they think glutamine
is respired, which means it's it's it's
it's used
uh with a functional mitochondria,
uh but it's not. It It can be respired
by normal cells, but it's fermented by
tumor cells. This is a very big
difference in biochemistry.
So, um so we discovered uh that these
tumors
uh use two fermentable fuels, and uh we
also
uh cleared up a lot of mess with the
oxygen consumption measurements, which
people assumed
uh was evidence for uh using energy
through oxygen. So, you measure how much
oxygen a normal or a tumor cell take up,
and you quantify the amount of energy
produced based on the oxygen
consumption.
And some tumors and and normal cells
take up similar amounts of oxygen,
leading Warburg and others to say that
some tumors can respire effectively.
Uh we clearly showed, we and others,
that that the oxygen consumption is not
linked to energy through oxidative
phosphorylation. So, it's a it's kind of
a misinformation thing. It It leads It
leads people down rabbit holes, and and
often to into misinformation. So, we
kind of cleared up
we straightened out the path, cleared up
a lot of the mis- misinformation,
and now we can move forward uh where
Warburg actually started, and where we
will finish. Because we know what causes
cancer, we we know what drive what what
the origin is, and we know uh how to
manage it, and we know how to prevent
it. So, when you put all that together,
uh we know what to do. The problem The
problem, of course We know at the
scientific biochemical level, we know
pretty much what's going on.
Uh but in the practicality
of of rolling this into an effective
therapeutic strategy
is is the big roadblock. Uh you you you
you know what to do, but there's very
few people that really want to do this
or can understand what what it's all
about. So,
um because right now, you're right, they
think cancer is a genetic disease caused
by
various mutations.
And the nuclear mitochondrial transfer
experiments completely completely
destroyed that. Um now we have uh
some cancers that have no mutations, and
we have all these driver gene mutations
find the normal found the normal tissues
that never develop cancer. So, when you
put all these facts together,
as I said, you have to be uh um um
hopeless ideologue uh to consider cancer
as a genetic disease. It It's not. It's
a mitochondrial metabolic disease.
It's driven by two fuels, glucose and
glutamine, and and uh and they can't
switch to uh fatty acids or ketone
bodies. So, that gives you the strategy
for knowing how to manage this disease.
You have to simultaneously target the
two fuels driving the dysregulated
growth,
while transitioning the body over to
nutritional ketosis, and then you come
in strategically
with drugs that target the
glutaminolysis pathway, because there's
no food or diet that will lower
glutamine. So, when people always ask
me, "What do I need to eat to lower
glutamine?" No, you can't do that.
Right. Right. You need drugs. And the
drugs that we are finding and others are
these simple parasite medications.
Uh mebendazole fenbendazole We published
the paper on that. They're targeting the
same two pathways that that that the
cancer cells need.
Um there's some other drugs that are
more powerful, but they're toxic, and
we're trying to figure out how to reduce
their toxicity. So, once we once we
package this all together, there will be
no reason in the world why anybody would
not want to manage their cancer using
metabolic therapy. Uh the problem is
they think cancer is a genetic disease,
uh supporting a multi-billion dollar
industry, um uh which is uh not working.
We We've We've got
According to the recent data from the
American Cancer Society uh that just
came out for their set for 2025,
Oh, okay. Yes. Wow. 16. Uh
618,000
people
are expected to die in 2025 from cancer.
Whi- Which comes to 1,700
people a day, or 70 people an hour.
Uh uh and it's getting worse and worse
every year. It's even It's even now
entering into the younger ages. Young
children and and
younger adults are getting cancer at at
at astonishing numbers.
And and this will continue, and will
keep get worse and worse as long as the
field thinks it's a genetic disease. As
long as the National Institutes of
Health on their website say cancer is a
genetic disease, we can expect a lot of
dead people, a lot of poor souls that
are dying as the result of this failure
uh to understand
>> [clears throat]
>> uh the biology and biochemistry of this
disorder. So, so until the the field
recognizes that this is a mitochondrial
metabolic disorder, we are not going to
see any dramatic uh drop in deaths.
And I And what I just said in that short
blurb uh
re- re-
represents 100 years of scientific
evaluation, and dozens and dozens of
scientific papers supporting everything
that just came out of my mouth.
>> [laughter]
>> And And you know, I think I could just
thank you for joining us today, and that
was a really great show, cuz I think you
literally just kind of rolled through my
entire outline in that initial.
Yeah. Well,
>> [laughter]
>> you know, you know,
But that's the long and the short of it,
right?
>> do a deep dive on the biochemistry if
you'd like, but I But sometimes people,
you know, get glassy-eyed on that.
>> [laughter]
>> Yeah. Well, so and I did. I I I You just
touched on something that has really hit
a nerve in my community and and in my
life is the fact that we're seeing
people younger and younger getting these
cancers in 20s and 30s, uh where we used
to not see that.
Um and and I wanted to kind of talk to
you, cuz I heard an amazing interview
that you did that kind of talks about
number one, this doesn't happen
overnight to the mitochondria. The
mitochondria don't break overnight. It
[snorts] It takes a long period of time
to do this. But what breaks What breaks
these mitochondria?
Well, it's it's not what breaks them.
It's what It's what disrupts their
ability to generate energy using oxygen.
Um so so
Uh let me give you an example.
Uh and you're right, it's a chronic It's
a chronic disruption of energy
metabolism
in in the mitochondria of a particular
cell in a particular organ.
So, what we have What we have found is
that all major cancers, all of them, all
major cancers, about 98%
of them, the
uh have the same problem.
Uh they all have If you look at under
the electron microscope, you see that
these organelles called the
mitochondria, which is kind of like a
spaghetti network inside the cell,
uh yeah, this is
This is a little cross-section. It It's
That That's what
That's not what they really look like in
in in the in the living cell. They're
like a spaghetti network all through the
cytoplasm. They fuse together, they
fission, they separate. It's like a
second living organism inside inside the
cell. Yeah. Okay. the way they
originated.
Um But you see those nice um
folds in there? Yes. You have the
cristae. They're called cristae. Yeah,
they they are all um
often times broken, missing. Uh we got
ghost mitochondria. So, they look just
look like vacuoles. Mhm.
So, those cristae contain uh the lipids
and the proteins responsible for us
generating energy through oxygen. So,
oxygen enters into these organelles and
pulls electrons,
forming water.
A- And in the matrix there, the the
space is uh is the TCA cycle,
tricarboxylic acid cycle.
Yeah.
>> Krebs cycle. You can call it different
things. But they break down the foods
that we eat,
a- a-
a- uh uh and get energy, and the waste
product of that is CO2, carbon dioxide.
Okay. So, the waste products of normal
respiration, like you and I are doing
right now, you're you and I are
breathing,
uh every time I take in oxygen,
uh I exhale CO2, and water is being
produced in these mitochondria that
eventually becomes uh attached to to
amino acids and proteins and and things
becomes urine, uh and we expel. So, we
excrete uh the waste products of
respiration in the form of uh CO2 and
water, and they And of course, with urea
combines with other things. But But in
the cancer cell,
um chronic disruption of that organelle
uh
causes a shift away from uh
uh energy through oxygen.
And you get You start to get energy
produced
with pa- uh with a mechanism that
doesn't involve oxygen. It's called
fermentation.
Um
uh and and the the exact
biochemical process is called
substrate-level phosphorylation, as
opposed to oxidative phosphorylation.
With oxygen. Yeah, with oxygen. Because
cancer cells
um can live in They Everybody knows they
grow in hypoxia, which is with the out
without oxygen. Um The other thing, too,
is we and Warburg and others,
uh they can grow in the presence of
cyanide. Um Now, we know uh
the old statement, you know, he drank
the Kool-Aid. The Kool- Well, that that
came from Jonestown.
Yeah. Yeah. where they put cyanide in
the Kool-Aid, and they all drank the
Kool-Aid, and they all died very
quickly.
Um Cyanide binds to
the protein that Warburg discovered,
this this the cytochrome c protein that
Warburg shuts down oxidative
phosphorylation completely, and you're
dead. Okay. All right? But cancer cells
can live in in cyanide.
A- And they can live without oxygen. So,
clearly, they're getting energy from a
non-oxidative source.
So,
>> I I heard real quick I I I just heard
you say that on a show. There was a Did
Warburg do the experiment where he
killed the mice who had cancer? He
killed them with cyanide. The mice died,
but the cancer cells, the tumors lived.
Oh, yeah. Well, I Not only I think
Warburg, but there was other guys who
did the same thing. So, there was a
Japanese group that did that as well.
>> Wow. Um Yeah, because And we did it. We
We did it here. Uh not killing the mice
with the tumors in them, but but looking
at the tumors under different
conditions. A lot of people have done
this. People know this. Um But But
Warburg said, once that mitochondria
becomes damaged, and oxidative
phosphorylation becomes insufficient, it
be- it's irreversible. He said it was
irreversible. Okay. Okay. And we we also
think the same. There's a threshold at
which you might be able to rescue some
mitochondria that are on that downslide
to switch to fermentation.
Um
you might be able to rescue them, but
once that
structure of that organelle is
compromised, uh, usually,
uh, the best way to deal with it is to
kill the cell that has that. Uh, and
that's why you
The tar- The way you kill the cancer
cell is you take away the two fuels that
that are replacing oxygen, the
fermentable fuels. So, they can't live
with that without those two fuels.
People say, "Oh, but they can use other
things."
Well, they can't use fatty acids or
ketone bodies. We tested that, others
have tested that. We know that. You You
need a good healthy mitochondria
to burn ketone bodies and fatty acids.
And as I just said, the mitochondria of
cancer cells are all corrupted. Uh, we
published big papers on that, others
have published published papers on that.
So, that the cell now becomes
vulnerable to elimination by simply
by simply restricting the fuels driving
the fermentation metabolism.
So, but you have to realize, how did
this all happen?
And we know from evolutionary biology
that life evolved in an environment
without oxygen,
um, called the alpha period of life on
Earth. So, we had these microorganisms
that, uh, that were alive and growing,
uh, in an in an atmosphere with no
oxygen.
So, uh, and they were using these
fermentation pathways, these pathways to
generate energy without without oxygen.
And then when oxygen became started to
become available in the atmosphere
by sci- these various bacteria producing
oxygen,
um, uh,
there was this fusion event where one
organ- when one organism fused with
another. These are single-cell
organisms, and that was the origin of
the mitochondria back then. Uh, and
those cells were able to use oxygen to
generate energy. And they fused with the
other cells that were predominantly
fermenters.
And then you had this beautiful synergy,
which people think only happened once in
the origin of life on Earth, and then
all life started,
complicated life, metazoans,
multicellular organisms. Yep. Yep. It
came from this original fusion event.
Uh, and then over millions of years of
evolution, we start to develop more and
more sophistication
in what these organisms, microorganisms,
you know, eukaryotes can do. Uh, there
becomes division of labor because you're
now once you have efficient energy,
there's a lot more things you can do
than if you have inefficient energy.
So, what happens in cancer is that
people are exposed to
a lot of different environmental
toxins or lifestyles
that will cause chronic damage to a
particular, uh, mitochondrion in a
particular cell in a particular organ.
For example, in breast cancer, you might
have an occluded milk duct uh, leading
to an inflammatory
foci in a in part of the breast, which
chronically would disrupt oxidative
phosphorylation in a in a in a cell in
that in that focus, uh, uh, leading to a
gradual transition to a fermentation
metabolism. It doesn't happen overnight.
Um, and once that transition happens
from respiration
to fermentation, which is which is
basically a replacement
of oxygenation with fermentation, and
that's what Warburg said, cancer start
when, uh,
uh, um,
oxidative phosphorylation is compensated
by fermentation, compensatory
fermentation.
Now, the issue, of course, well, how
does that lead to dysregulated cell
growth, which is what cancer is?
And and I'm talking about cancer in any
tissue, any major cancer
all start with a chronic disruption of
oxidative phosphorylation. That could be
started
by systemic inflammation, intermittent
hypoxia, uh, various oncogenic viruses,
um,
as I said, chronic inflammation in the
body, radiation, uh, even in rare
inherited mutations damage these
mitochondria.
So, we we've been able to link all
known,
uh, causes of cancer
into a common pathophysiological
mechanism,
which involves the replacement of
oxidative phosphorylation with
substrate-level phosphorylation, which
is fermentation. Now, why is that so
important?
Because you have to realize,
those cells that existed on our planet
before oxygen came into the environment,
they were all fermenting. They all had
unbridled proliferation, dysregulated
growth,
and they would die only when the
fermentable fuels in the in the
environment at that time would be
dissipated, and these cells would die.
So, there was no regulation of growth.
The The growth came as long as
fermentable fuels were in the
environment.
>> Available. So, so, so, the cancer cell
is doing nothing more than falling back
on these ancient pathways. And it is the
mitochondrion
that determines the differentiated
quiescent state of cells in our body.
So, if we need to replace cells, they
divide, but the division to replace a
dead cell is well regulated. It's
regulated by the activity of the
mitochondrion itself. So, the
mitochondrion controls the cell cycle
through calcium signaling, which is a we
know calcium is a very powerful
signaling molecule, but it's also
regulated by the energy efficiency of
the mitochondrion. So, as the
mitochondria becomes less and less
functional and starts to gravitate
towards fermentation, it loses the
capability to maintain the stable
differentiated state,
and the cell now starts to divide in an
uncontrolled manner, and will continue
to do that as long as glucose and
glutamine are available in the
microenvironment. And our bodies make
huge amounts of glutamine because it's
essential for our gut and our immune
system. We Our immune system needs
glutamine to fight bacteria and repair
tissues and all this kind of stuff. So,
glutamine is always there in great
abundance, far more than any cancer cell
would need. The availability of
glutamine is always there. That's why
you need drugs to target the glutamine.
You can't do it by diet.
But the glucose can be
managed by diet. So, diet can manage the
glucose part of the the equation, where
drugs will manage the the glutamine part
part of the equation. Now, let me just
give you another example,
uh, which is quite eye-opening. Um, the
waste products that we see coming out of
cancer cells, like as I said, waste
products of respiration are CO2 and
water.
The cancer cells, the waste products are
are lactic acid and succinic acid. These
are the two organic waste products. You
should never be wasting uh, precious uh,
carbon-hydrogen bonds. CO2 and water are
are are are are
no longer possess, uh, energy.
Whereas Okay. Where- Whereas
[clears throat] Whereas lactic acid and
succinic acid contain carbon-hydrogen
bonds, uh, which embody the the energy
of the sun. The energy of the sun
creates carbon-hydrogen bonds. So, when
we break down carbon-hydrogen bonds,
we're essentially releasing back the
energy of the sun to drive our
metabolism. We get the energy back from
the sun.
>> Wow. In a sophisticated, organized
procedure in the mitochondrion.
Wow. So, so, so, cancer cells are
dumping out large amounts of succinic
acid and lactic acid into the
microenvironment,
telling us that they're fermenting.
Those are the waste products of glucose
fermentation in the cytoplasm, and
glutamine fermentation in the
mitochondria. Our Our big discovery was
that the mitochondria can ferment
glutamine, and the waste product is
succinic acid.
>> That's
Okay. So, And they're doing that even in
the presence of oxygen. So, that was
what Warburg said, they ferment in the
presence of oxygen, this should not
happen.
So, let's look at another example that
all of us can uh, really appreciate, a
heart attack. Okay. Yes.
>> Somebody has a cardiovascular arrest or
what What do you want to call it, a
heart attack? Um, they stop breathing,
uh, cuz the heart no longer is pump-
They The heart is no longer pumping
oxygen into the bloodstream. So, when
that person's heart seizes
temporarily,
um, uh, you You don't die instantly like
you had like the cyanide poisoning, uh,
which is a permanent shutdown of
oxidative phosphorylation. Uh, the body
immediately becomes hypoxic, you're
turning purple, and and but immediately
the majority of cells in our body switch
on fermentation uh, very rapidly to keep
the cells alive. And we can And the body
can do that for a short period of time,
like over few minutes. Otherwise, you
don't get that heart beating quick,
uh, you're going to be dead.
And you die because the brain
essentially, uh, the neurons in the
brain die. They're very, very oxygen,
uh,
dependent dependent.
>> But when you look at the bloodstream of
a person who has a heart attack, you get
large amounts of lactic acid and
succinic acid, uh, building up in the
bloodstream. Waste products of glucose
and glutamine fermentation. So, the
heart All the different cells in our
body use those same two fuels because
the waste products are there.
The issue, of course, is when you uh,
get the heart to beat again, and the
person starts breathing again,
the lactic acid and the succinic acid
immediately disappear from the
bloodstream
because you're breathing. You don't need
to ferment. The cancer cell ferments is
locked in It's locked into the
fermentation because its mitochondria
are irreparably dysfunctional. So, now
we know We know precisely what's going
on with this whole, uh, process, and we
know the cancer cells are continually
throwing out lactic acid and succinic
acid in the presence of oxygen which can
only happen if the mitochondria
dysfunctional and oxidative
phosphorylation is insufficient for
driving
right so now how are we going to how can
we fix cancer well you can put like
putting a new engine in your car you can
put new mitochondria in the cell and
that's been done in vitro and you can
stop cancer that way but you that's not
what happens in the body we're not there
yet
can can I ask you about that cuz that's
one of the things I've been one of the
most interesting experiments I think
people be
interested is
there were experiments where they took
the nucleus of a cancer cell and put it
in a healthy cell to see if that healthy
cell would get cancer
and a nucleus from a healthy cell into a
cancer cell to see if it would make it
healthy
and then they also did that with
mitochondria can
can you go through that yeah I I I I
summarized those experiments for the
first time they they've always been in
the literature but no one linked them
all together
to challenge the somatic mutation theory
of cancer Israel
and Schafer from the University of
Vermont did those beautiful experiments
that you just mentioned but they were
also done in frogs and mice
and different different different
experimental systems
which which provides the strongest
evidence that cancer cannot be a genetic
disease you're absolutely right so what
was found is that you have
a tumor cell that grows and how do you
know you well you put it under the skin
of a mouse experiment they were rats not
mice
and you got a tumor
so the investigators
went back and thought maybe the cell the
cell that they
derived those cells from maybe was tumor
but then they took the original clone
and put it under the skin of a rat it
didn't form tumor
so so clearly something happened over
many generations in the culture dish to
make this cell turn into a tumor cell
so to test that they took the nucleus
out of the tumor cell
and put it into the side of they removed
the normal nucleus
of the of the of the normal cell and put
the the the nucleus of the tumor cell
into that cytoplasm and put that under
the skin of the rat and and they got
no tumors just I think one out of 76
on the other hand when they took the
nucleus
of the normal cell
they took the nucleus of the tumor cell
out and put the normal nucleus in there
and then put that under the skin of the
rat
they get 98% tumors from that which
clearly says that it's the cytoplasm
that's calling the shots on whether the
cells are regulated or deregulated
and and McKinnell who I talked to with
the frogs he did the same thing he took
kidney the nucleus out of a raging tumor
in the kidney and and put put that tumor
nucleus into a fertilized frog egg with
a with a normal nucleus was removed
and he developed a clear tadpole
completely normal from the nucleus of a
malignant
kidney tumor
and I asked him about that when he was
alive he was the curator of the medical
library at the University of Minnesota
in in Minneapolis
and and and and he told me he said I
even cut the tails off these tadpoles
and they grew a perfectly normal tail
all regulated in growth from from the
nucleus
of a kidney tumor so clearly the
regulation of cell growth was not coming
from the nuclei it was coming from the
cytoplasm
and then having if you damage the
mitochondria in the cytoplasm you no
longer get regulated growth you get
deregulated growth so clearly it all
points back to the side to the
mitochondria within the cytoplasm are
calling the shots
on whether or not we get cancer so so if
you want to prevent cancer you have to
keep your mitochondria healthy very very
hard to get cancer if your mitochondria
are healthy
so what we in our new society of the
present day society where we are
bombarded by lack of exercise a poorly
processed highly carbohydrate foods
stress poor sleep all of these things
impact negatively on the structure and
function of the mitochondria in a
particular
cell of a particular organ and voila you
got cancer where did it come from well
we're now saturated with microplastics
forever chemicals no exercise poorly
processed carbohydrate none of this
stuff ever existed in our in our
ancestral past so we clearly know
what is
what is provocative to the origin of
cancer we know the mechanism by which it
happens we know it now how to manage
this because they can't grow without
fermentable fuel so we can target that
while transitioning to fuels that the
tumor cells can't use because they can't
burn fatty acids or ketones because
mitochondria defective
so so the the the this a solution to
both prevention and management is here
we have it we know what to do the
question is
who wants to do this
right right that's that's absolutely the
big challenge
and when you you know I you bring it up
to people at the top
cancer centers whether it's Dana Farber
here today in Boston that we have in
Boston MD Anderson you hear about Sloan
Kettering the Moffitt the Fred Hutch you
can go around the country the James
most of the oncologists never heard that
glucose drives drives cancer
so you you go to the cafeteria to see
people being infused with chemo drinking
a big Coca-Cola
I mean what could be more
absurd than doing something like this
but that tells you that this what I've
just explained to you is never never
been heard or understand it like people
say well you know all this stuff
nobody's doing why don't you go down and
ask the guys at [laughter] Dana Farber
do you know what I just said they said
no never heard about this and the other
thing they would say is if it really
important I would have heard about it in
medical school you're
not hearing about it in medical school
what you're hearing is that cancer is a
genetic disease in medical school so and
that perpetuates the death suffering
of patients so we can put the whole
thing together we know exactly what's
happening we know how to we know how to
do it all the problem is that that and
I'm not so they're not enthusiastic to
do this either
because we we they can't figure out how
to generate revenue on what we're
talking about and don't always remember
remember and never forget revenue
generation first patient outcome second
that's the way it works that's the
system that's the industry so until
somebody can figure out how to make a
big buck on what we're talking about we
got 1700 people a day dying from this
disease just that simple
well you know and I think that's why
it's important to have shows like this
and to have a a mechanism to get this
information to the people directly right
because I know that there are many many
many people who would love to understand
if there's something they can they can
do personally to try to prevent cancer
and when they get it there there are
people who are desperate to do anything
they can do to try to beat it
and so I can tell you that you know
ketogenic metabolic therapy
is a powerful arm for the new paradigm
we we don't throw out radiation and
chemo
because they also have a part even the
immunotherapies do
but we would not use them as up front
strategies for managing cancer
the the the best way to do this
we think is that we would want to shrink
down the tumor at the beginning make it
indolent less angry less inflamed
and then if we can't get rid of it
completely with metabolic therapy we
would then come in with strategic drug
and
radiation targeting and things like this
even surgery even surgery
will be more effective if the borders of
the tumor are more circumscribed and
definable the surgeons feel better that
they get it all out rather than a part
of it because when they don't get it all
out it can come back at you
and you want to make sure you you get
rid of this thing as best as possible so
up front metabolic therapy shrinking it
down making the rest of the body healthy
and then coming in using some of our
drugs toxic as they are but you can use
them in very low doses now so they
become far less toxic and more
therapeutic it's actually beautiful so
so but they're not doing any of that
this is not this is not what we call the
part of the standard of care and I know
a lot of physicians that would love to
do what I just mentioned but they're
going to fear they fear losing their
license for not following the rigidity
of the standard of care
so we have to why was the standard of
care written and granted it should be
flexible when something new comes along
that can be of great value to the health
and well-being of people you should be
able to integrate that into your
standard practices to improve the
overall outcome and this is not being
done
so
so people need to know that I feel bad
because a lot of people
email me and they say oh listen you say
all this stuff and then when I go down
to my oncologist they slap me down they
say never heard of it I must this if
this can't be true because they would
have heard
there's a transition of knowledge here
we we we we have to become
scientifically literate and know about
this and the the patient and the and the
oncologist should work together as a
team
because the success of metabolic therapy
for cancer management
uh
on the uh knowledge of both the
of the physician and the patient.
Because now the patient is predominantly
in charge of their destiny. They're the
ones that have to get their blood sugar
down. They're the ones that have to get
their ketones up. That's why we
developed the glucose ketone index
calculator, the GKI, to allow every
person who has a chronic disease,
especially cancer, to get their blood
sugar down and their ketones up, putting
that tumor in a state of metabolic
vulnerability. Yeah, yeah.
>> and that now they work with the
oncologist to polish off and slowly
degrade uh the tumor. So, we have the
tools. We have the know-how. We have the
strategies. We're just not implementing
any of this yet. Yet.
Yet.
Right. And that's that's that's what
we're hopeful for. Um I actually just
heard that in another show in the past
couple days I was listening to that you
were instrumental in developing GKI.
Yeah, we we published that. Um I
published it based on a on a on a
wonderful woman, uh an American who was
living in Nice, Nice, France. And she
had a a brainstem tumor, um
um
diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma, uh
which is pretty deadly. And and uh I I
was right after I wrote my book that
this person reached out to me
and said, "Let's do me a metabolic
therapy." Uh she she didn't want any
radiation or chemo or anything.
So, she lasted about eight year eight
and a half years, but that was even
before we started targeting the
glutamine. We really didn't know too
much about the glutamine targeting at
that time. Okay.
>> but what was happening was was um we
were she was measuring her her blood
sugar and and measuring ketones
independently of each other. Right.
>> got into a fight uh over a parking spot.
Uh she had a handicap parking spot. And
she went up and measured her blood sugar
and it was through the roof. Uh very
high, like like I think it was uh 160 mg
per deciliter. It was very high, like a
diabetic or something. Right, right.
>> emailed me and she said, "Oh my god, my
my blood sugar is so high. My tumor is
going to grow fast." I said, "What's
your ketones?" And she said, "Oh, no,
they're about 2 millimolar. Didn't go
They didn't go down. They stayed high."
So, I said to my students, I said, "No,
that we we've got to come up with a new
way to take the anxiety out of these
measurements." Wow.
>> we divide we divided the blood sugar uh
by the value of the key We transitioned
uh sugar and ketones to millimolar. And
then we can divide glucose by ketone.
And then and then you don't get such a
big spike because the ketones are are
you're dividing that blood sugar by the
ketone. Right.
>> So, then the anxiety of these things
goes way down. And we realized also that
anxiety makes blood sugar go high
because of your uh glucocorticoid
levels. So, lowering glucocorticoid
levels, increasing exercise, uh which is
an extremely important part of managing
cancer, uh all all all um reducing
stress. When you exercise, your muscles
your muscles are pulling sugar out of
the bloodstream. Yes.
>> Lowering anxiety lowers blood sugar.
Uh you get your whole body into a new
metabolic state and then you come in
strategically and target those that
glutamine pathway. And uh you're going
to be take you're going to be hammering
the hell out of these tumors while your
body is getting healthier and healthier.
And no baldness here.
Uh
all this crazy stuff that we're doing,
mucositis and diarrhea and microbiome
and all this crazy stuff. I mean, this
is the result of a medieval therapy
[laughter]
conducted by people who lack knowledge.
I mean, it's just it's just that simple.
>> [laughter]
>> I I love I love that concept, too, that
you just talked about. When you when you
use metabolic or ketogenic therapy, when
you put the body in that state, um the
rest of the healthy cells are actually
getting healthier. Yeah.
>> Right. They're getting everything they
need and that they can use and they're
getting healthier while the tumor cells
are getting weaker and weaker because
they're starving. Yes. And not only
that, if you keep doing this like we did
with the dog, we had a dog that was
probably the only thing we truly
knew we could
I saw that. Yeah, you're right. I saw
that on the yeah. Yeah, the the body
will turn on the tumor for food. It's
called autolytic cannibalism. When you
have restricted the fuels to the body,
the body has an a remarkable healing
machine. It surveillances all cells and
tissues in the body to make sure
that every cell, every organ is is
operational at maximum efficiency
because the food sources are limited.
So, we have to the body has to be
remarkably
uh um efficient. Efficiency comes from
oxidative phosphorylation. So, if you
have a group of cells or in a tissue
that is not carrying the weight of
efficiency,
the body will actually dissolve that
tissue and use the fuels of those cells
to feed the good cells. Wow. Wow. So, so
autolytic cannibal, I have it in my
book. So, so again, we have to allow the
body to heal itself. Uh and we have to
know how to do that. And metabolic
ketogenic metabolic therapy is the
strategy that allows us to manage
cancer. And not only cancer, all these
chronic diseases as well.
That's kind of the
the link, right? You know, we're we're
talking about heart disease and and
diabetes, uh Alzheimer's and dementia.
Right. Um all of these diseases now we
we're finding the link to to chronic
carbohydrate overconsumption, insulin
resistance and hyperinsulinemia,
creating that environment for these
things to thrive. Yeah, and and and all
of we have linked all of the chronic
diseases to mitochondrial dysfunction in
one way or another.
So, so in the case of heart heart tissue
can there's so some tissues in our body
that don't form cancer.
Uh cardiac myocytes do not form cancer
because they cannot switch to
fermentation. They are so they have such
a demand for energy through oxidative
phosphorylation. They can't transition.
So, you can never get or rarely if ever
get cancer from cardiac myocytes or
neurons in the brain.
Uh neurons in the brain uh cannot switch
to a fermentation metabolism. Therefore,
neurons die. That's why in Parkinson's
disease and Alzheimer's disease and
these things, you don't get cancer, you
get dead neurons. You get dead cells.
But it's ultimately linked to the
mitochondria. It's a mitochondrial
dysfunction. But without the
compensatory fermentation. In cells that
can compensate oxphos with fermentation,
then you that puts those cells at risk
for dysregulated cell growth, which is
cancer. Whereas other cells just up and
die. So, but everything ultimately comes
back to the health and vitality of the
mitochondria in the body. That that
tells us uh and and they also determine
how long we're going to live.
Um uh we're all destined to die.
Uh we have a finite amount of life for
each species. You know, you can you can
accelerate you can
or or or expand that that. But
it's when our mitochondria systemically
run out of energy, we die. We die from
the second law of thermodynamics, which
is disorder. Uh and all mitochondria
will when you die like you can look at a
person like even the Queen. She looked
very healthy and shaking hands with with
with with with the new Prime Minister
one day and dead the next day. The Queen
of England. Uh so it appears that the
that the mitochondria can just shut off
uh when they reach a point where they
can no longer maintain energy balance.
Uh but we chronically damage our body so
we can have all these different uh
readouts of this thing. But but bottom
line, you keep your mitochondria healthy
uh and you have a chance to live longer
and with a healthier life.
Um but of course our diets and
lifestyles
wear and tear on our mitochondria,
shorten our
our life. Um peo- some people you can't
live to be 150. We're not pro- our my at
this time we have not figured out how to
keep our mitochondria healthier.
Okay.
>> there's other groups out there. There's
Petros Paradox. They say, "Oh, elephants
have all these things. The elephants can
You know,
elephants
uh or they live long, but what do they
eat? They're eating their natural diet,
right?
Uh right. Why don't we why don't we give
elephants uh pizzas every day and and
and Dunkin Donuts uh glazed donuts as
much as they possibly can eat. Let's see
let's see how long these damn elephants
live. Uh I I had a friend who
who uh the the polar bear at at the
Brookfield Zoo in Chicago, I think
that's what it was,
um died from pancreatic uh cancer from
kids throwing the candy to the to the to
the polar bear all the time. So, he did
a pathology and the
poor damn the the bear died from
pancreatitis and pancreatic problems.
So, clearly polar bears did not evolve
uh to eat Snickers bars.
Right.
>> yeah, right? So, but they love Snicker
bar. I mean, you can give a the polar
bear will just gobble these Snicker bars
down. Uh but but if you give it to them
every day for years, he dies from the
same stuff we die from. It would ruin
their health as well, right? Right?
Well, the same with the mice. And dogs.
Domestic cancer is the number one killer
of domestic dogs.
Um and the dogs are eating the same crap
we're eating. They're highly processed
carbohydrates.
Not appropriate for their evolutionary
biology.
I mean, there's no mystery here.
Um so so uh all of what we can explain
most aspects of chronic diseases with a
with a clear understanding of
evolutionary biology and biochemistry.
Unfortunately, a lot of people just
don't have that that knowledge or or
just were never exposed to it.
So, once you understand that, then you
can then you can uh develop therapeutic
strategies uh for improving. And that
does not mean that you have to deny
yourself the enjoyments of our
technological societies.
Uh baked goods and things evolved uh we
developed those
uh over the years to be tremendously
tasty and we enjoy them.
Um but they were more a lot of the these
were developed by natural natural
ingredients.
Unfortunately, today our we're just
loaded with highly processed carbs.
And and I think a report just came out
on obesity. It it's related to how much
highly processed carbs people are
eating.
Um it's not a genetic Some
some mindless people Can you imagine
saying that obesity is caused by
genetics? I mean, if it weren't if
these mindless physicians at some of
these universities. I can't understand
it. They go through medical school, they
don't learn anything.
So, um
but but if it weren't for our ability to
store fat, you you and I would never we
wouldn't have this conversation. We
would be extinct.
Right. So, we're perfect. Humans are
magnificently geared to store store
energy.
So, when you have large amounts of
highly processed carbs coming into your
body, you're storing it as energy think
thinking that there could be a famine
coming. Um because we evolved in
feast-famine environments and and now
we're always in a in a feast environment
and we're paying unanticipated
consequence of our development of grains
and rices is dementia, diabetes, cancer,
cardiovascular disease, autism, uh not
not autism, uh
all these other some of these other
neuropsychiatric problems are all the
result of mitochondrial dysfunction in
an in a new in a new environment that we
did not evolve in.
Absolutely. That's a and again, I I
think we look at two
I think we look at evolutionary biology,
right? Yeah. Um and and we're looking at
at at hunters and gatherers didn't have
all of this stuff. They they primarily
lived a ketogenic lifestyle and they got
they got access to fruit when it was
time to fatten up for winter, right? To
make it through.
Yeah, they they they would have
>> that you talk about? Yeah, and I all all
of our
most of our not all, of course, many
many organisms lived in this kind of an
environment. Um even the orangutan, uh
we found some data on looking at ketones
in the orangutan
and they had very low ketosis during the
fruiting when the fruits were all ripe
and when the fruits were gone, they were
back in ketosis again.
So, so clearly that kind of parallels I
think what our ancestors
during the Paleolithic period because
the Neolithic period is when we started
to cultivate grains and then what do we
get? We get civilization
developing around constant food source
uh rather than, you know, being uh
hunter-gatherer kind. But but um
some of my colleagues in in Hungary
treat cancer using Paleolithic diets.
Essentially, it's very low carbohydrate
diets, uh high in protein and fat. And
uh that lowers your GKI.
Yeah. Uh and that's directly linked to
how fast your tumor grows or whether or
not you get cancer in the first place.
So, you keep a low GKI
uh and it prevents cancer. And if you
have cancer, you take a low GKI and come
in with targeting a glutamine targeting
drugs with exercise.
Um so, all of these things are are are
pattern we can do it we can do all this.
We just have to
uh people just need to know what to do.
We we just published a a monster paper
in um
Biomedical Central a BMC Medicine
um which outlines a a therapeutic
strategy for managing brain cancer
glioblastoma. And we had about 30
authors on this, physicians and
nutritionists and basic scientists.
And it really spells out very clearly by
my colleague Dr. Thomas Seyfried, uh
who's the first author on the paper.
A clear strategy for managing
uh
uh this brain cancer. But as I said, all
these cancers have the same problem. So,
you could use it for lung cancer, colon,
breast.
It's clearly spelled out. Uh a strategy,
a clear what to do and how to do
strategy for treating cancer is already
available.
Um but it's not adapted. It's not part
of uh standards of care. So, um Yet.
It's yet. It will be. It will be the
standard of care once people realize
that this is if you want to stay alive.
But but if you want to live a life
we can't predict how long you will live.
We don't know if if this will because we
never use the term cure.
Cure is an arrogant term. We we we we
can't promise anyone cure, nor can they
promise a cure from any conventional
standard.
Uh people say you live 5 years and you
didn't have a recurrence and then 5 and
1/2 years you get a recurrence. Were you
cured? And I don't know.
So, so the best thing is we can do is we
want uh successful management. Whether
that turns out to be a cure or not, we
we don't know. But I consider, in my
view, successful management is success.
Um if you're living far longer than you
were predicted to live with a with a
good quality of life, I consider that
success.
Uh and so should the patient. Um uh and
and that's what we strive for. We strive
for continuing to improve overall
survival.
Um progression-free survival is what the
Food and Drug Administration um
uses to award new drugs.
Wow.
>> it's very interesting because some of
these drugs, they look like they they
they had a tremendous effect on the
tumor,
but uh a progression-free which looks
like, "Oh my god, this tumor shrunk and
but you only live two or three months
longer." It's not improving your overall
survival. It's it's only a short-term
appearance of a fix.
>> Right. Right. Uh and they approve drugs
based on that. They should eliminate
that. Drugs should be approved on
overall survival, not progression-free
survival. Well, you can do both, but
overall survival should be the most
important criteria for determining
whether or not something is working.
So, we constantly approve drug after
drug after drug and all we get is more
and more dead cancer patients. So,
something is is missing here. So, what's
going on? Where our approval mechanism
is flawed. We're we're not using the
appropriate We when we do our
preclinical studies,
uh our preclinical mouse work, we look
for overall survival. Um how long can
these animals live with a raging
malignant tumor? How how effective are
we in managing that tumor? These mice
always have the tumor. We have not cured
a mouse with cancer, a natural form of
cancer, yet.
But we can keep them alive m- many many
months longer than they would they would
have lived. But we have not cured People
say, "Oh, you cured a mouse." Yeah, you
cured genetically engineered things that
are not representative of the real
world. You take a real world metastatic
cancer in the mouse, you try to cure it
in an in a mouse in a natural mouse,
it's very very hard, just like it is in
the human.
That's why we learned to do targeting
glucose and glutamine. We learned all
that from our preclinical studies. And
then we then translate that right into
the clinic and when people try to do
this now, you're getting really really
remarkable results on those individuals
that know understand. We see the best
results are those cancer people cancer
patients that understand what cancer is
and they know that their actions will be
largely responsible for their success.
This is very different than if you go to
the oncology and you just sit there like
some mannequin and they just bombard you
with all these toxins and you're really
not doing anything. Then we say, "Oh,
he's battling cancer." He's not battling
cancer. He's just sitting there being
brutalized by a system. When when you do
metabolic therapy, you are in fact
battling cancer. Right.
>> that's a big big difference here. So,
people want to battle cancer, they do
ketogenic metabolic therapy and parts of
the standard of care that will be
synergistic with ketogenic
>> Right. Right. Right.
>> outcomes will be far greater.
Absolutely. Um as we wrap this up, where
where can people What are the best
resources you recommend for people who
want to do their own personal uh
investigation deep dive? Let's let's
say, you know, they're diagnosed fresh.
They they want to find out as much
information as they can. Well, you know,
all of our what I've mentioned is all
open access. Uh what I mean by that is
you just have to look my name up and
what is he publishing and you get all of
these papers. Uh a lot of them are
heavy. I don't I don't want to say that
this is like uh pleasurable easy reading
Sunday afternoon reading. Uh you'd
really have to sit down with someone,
maybe, and go over in detail and spend
some time. I give a kid of information.
All we ask is that if you survive and
you do well, donate to our foundation,
Travis Christofferson's Foundation for
Cancer Metabolic things. They support
our research. All of the work that we're
doing is supported by uh philanthropy
and private foundations. Yep.
There are people who
who who want to be part of the of of the
paradigm shift. Um
There are people out there who like to
be a part of this
who don't care whether they can make a
lot of money on it. They just want to
say I was part of this new
transformation. And we're the ones doing
that. So, uh the more we I write human
case reports as well for people that are
using this. So, I publish those They're
They take a lot of time and energy to do
that. Uh but most of the work most of
the funds that we get support my
my research staff of scientists and
physicians and and students here at
Boston College. So, so we train young
people. They're getting very excited
about this. I bet.
Yeah, and people are coming back to us
with stories of success.
Uh people I think are dead. You know, I
I I hear a guy he comes back and he
says, "I haven't heard from this guy for
2 years. I figured he must be dead." He
comes back and he says, "Oh, no, I'm
doing really well. I'm still alive."
>> [laughter]
>> I'm I'm saying to myself, "Well, that's
that's really great news." Um And we're
trying to catalog these people now, uh
get a registry of how many are survivors
long-term people. They they gave me 3
months to live or we gave me told me I'd
be dead in a year and here he is like 5
years later. Now, some of them still
have their cancer.
It's just they're living with it. And
and [clears throat] they've learned to
realize that
some of them can watch it grow when they
eat sugar and watch it decline when they
stop eating sugar.
>> Oh dear lord. Oh yeah.
>> Oh my god.
>> Oh yeah. I I've spoken to people who who
watch actually watch the grow It's all
related to the level of blood sugar. So
>> Right. Right.
>> Yeah and you do exercise. So it's
there's a lot of strategies that we can
use to manage this cancer. But we're
working Yeah, we're working out the sign
the mechanisms. You see the scientific
community the the real heavy guys, they
got to see mechanisms. They want to see
mechanisms of action. They want to see
Well, we're doing that. We have to do
that to validate what we're doing. But
at the same time we're managing the
disease and at the same time ferreting
out the mechanisms by which the what
what what's explains the results that
you're getting.
So it's a two-pronged. You got the
clinical on one side and the basic
research on the other side. Right.
Absolutely. And and your book Cancer is
a metabolic disease. That's that's not
an easy reader. I I saw that on Amazon.
It's about 100 110 bucks. Yeah, well
that was done by chance. Yeah, well this
is this is John Wiley. They're they're a
professional textbook. They're a science
They're they're
They're they're a scientific book
publishing company. They don't publish,
you know, these 1990
And I wrote only one book. I didn't
write all these review all these
summaries and all that. Other people are
taking my YouTube videos
distilling down what I'm saying
writing books with my name on it saying
I wrote this and I didn't do that. So
And that's just what happens in this
kind of world. But yeah, my book is
we've got so much new information
added on to the the platform
that supports almost everything that I
wrote about in 2012.
We even have stronger evidence now to
support that stuff. So we're we're we're
on the right path. There's no question
about it. And and and the society will
come to know
because it works.
>> [laughter]
>> Yeah, right.
>> Bottom line, it works. It doesn't hurt
you. And and if you can manage your
cancer effectively, we take the fear of
God out of this whole thing. You know,
so many so many people they get
diagnosed with cancer and they have them
they they think that the angel of death
is looking over their shoulder. That
they're they're going to make a date
with the Grim Reaper. You know, we're
putting the Grim Reaper out of business
here. So
you have power within your body as long
as you know what to do and how to do it.
You have the you have the opportunity to
manage this disorder more effectively
which builds up your confidence and
reduces anxiety. So you're you're you're
people get fear-stricken. They they they
they get into a depression. You know,
everybody doesn't want to talk to them.
They they think they're This is absurd.
And a lot of families all gather
together and they all go on metabolic
therapy together. They all get super
They all get healthy together.
>> And they all get healthy together and
they all live in metabolic lives and uh
Yes. Absolutely. So it's just the word
has to get out. That's all. We're just
we're just not The word is not out yet
completely.
Well, I we are certainly going to do our
best to get this word out.
Again, thank you so much for the time
that you spent with us, doc. I really
appreciate you. We are going to go
ahead. We're going to have links to how
they can donate
to the cause in our show notes for you
and
and and where they might be able to get
resources as well. That'll be great.
That'll be great. Thank you very much.
Yeah, thank you, sir. I'm going to send
you backstage real quick and I'm going
to land the airplane. I'll be right
back. Okay.
Ladies and gentlemen, that was quite a
quite a ride on this on this episode of
the show as I knew it would. Very deep
dive and we're probably going to have
more episodes so that we can we can
tease out some of this amazing
information that Dr. Seyfried shared
with us. So as always,
keep striving, keep reaching for your
life possible.
That's a wrap for this [music] episode
of the Life Possible podcast where we
unlock the power of metabolic health to
fuel your best life. If you found value
[music] in today's conversation, don't
forget to like, subscribe, and download
the podcast so you never miss an
episode. And if this message resonated
with you, share to someone who needs to
hear it. Let's spread the power of life
[music] possible together.
For more inspiration, insights, and
[music] exclusive content, be sure to
follow us on Facebook, Instagram, and
LinkedIn. Thanks for tuning in. Keep
striving, keep thriving, and remember,
[music]
your best life is within reach.